# Tool name
Sequence Read Archive (SRA) is a library of raw DNA and RNA sequencing data.


## Purpose
SRA's purpose is to store and provide public access to raw sequencing data generated by high-throughput sequencing technologies.


## Function
Fastq data is highly compressed, which is why we cannot download fastq files directly. To get data from the SRA, we use two tools: prefetch, which downloads .sra files in the raw compressed format used by NCBI and fasterq-dump, which converts .sra files into .fastq files, which are text files of sequencing reads. Each read has a name, DNA sequence, and quality score.


## Usage
Two main command-line tools are used for this process. 

The first, prefetch, downloads .sra files from the SRA database. It pulls data using accession numbers (e.g., SRR12345678) and saves them in your local system for further processing. 

The second, fasterq-dump, extracts raw sequencing reads from .sra files and converts them into .fastq format, which is suitable for downstream analysis (e.g., quality control, alignment).

```
# Step 1: Download the .sra file
prefetch SRR12345678 --output-directory ./sra_data

# Step 2: Convert .sra to .fastq fasterq-dump
./sra_data/SRR12345678.sra  --outdir ./fastq_data --threads 4
```

fasterq-dump SRR12345678: Converts the downloaded .sra file into .fastq format.

-S: Output both paired-end reads into a single interleaved FASTQ file (used in specific workflows).

--threads <n>: Sets the number of CPU threads (e.g., --threads 8) to accelerate the dumping process.

--outdir <dir>: Specify the output directory where .fastq files will be saved.
